I would like to show you how
architecture has helped to change the
life of my community and have opened
opportunities to hope I am a native of
Burkina Faso
according to the World Bank for kena
Faso is one of the poorest country in
the world but what does it look like to
grow up in a place like that I am an
example of that I was born in Little
Village Hall Gondo in Uganda there was
no electricity no access to clean
drinking water and no school but my
father wanted me to learn how to read
and write for this reason I have to
leave my family when I was seven and to
stay in a city far away from my village
with no contact with my family in this
place sat in a class like that with more
than 150 other cats and for six years in
this time it just happened to me to come
to school to realize that my classmate
was died today not so much a change
there is still no electricity in my
village people still die in Burkina Faso
and access to clean drinking water is
still a big problem
I had a luck I was lucky because this is
fact of life when you grow up in a place
like that but I was lucky had a
scholarship I could go to Germany to
study
so now as suppose I don't need to
explain to you how great a privilege it
is for me to be standing before you
today from Gondo my home village in
Burkina Faso to Berlin in Germany to
become an architect is a big big step so
but what to do with this privilege since
ss2 a student I would have to open up
better opportunities to other kids in
Ghana I just wanted to use my skills and
build school but how do you do when you
still a student and you don't have money
oh yes I started to make drawings and
ask for money fundraising was not an
easy task I even asked my classmate to
spend less money on coffee and cigarette
but to sponsor my school project
we will wander two years later I was
able to collect 50,000 US dollar when I
came home to Gondo to bring the good
news my people was over the moon
but when they realized that I was
planning to use clay they were shocked a
clay building is not able to stand a
rainy season and Francis want us to use
it and build a skull is this the reason
why he spent so much time in Europe
studying instead of working on the field
with us
Matt people build all the time with clay
but they don't see any innovation with
man so I had to convince everybody I
started to speak with the community and
I could convince everybody and we could
start to work and the women the man
everybody from the religious part was
part of this building process I was
allowed to use even traditional
techniques so clay floor for example the
young man comes and say like that
beating I was four hours and then their
mother came and had bit in this position
for hours giving water even water and
beating and then the polisher cap they
start polishing it with a stone for
hours and then you have this result very
fine like a baby button is now Photoshop
this is the school built with the
community the walls are totally made out
of compressive clay blocks from gam
the roof structure is made with cheap
steel bars normally hide in the inside
concrete in the classroom the ceiling is
made out of both of them used together
in this school there was a simple idea
to create comfort in the classroom don't
forget it can be 45 degree in burkina
faso so with simple ventilation i wanted
to make the classroom good for teaching
and learning and this is the project
today to reveal years old still in best
condition and the kids they love it and
for me and the community this project
was a huge success
it has opened up opportunities to do
more project in Ghana so I could do a
lot of project and here I am going to
share with you only three of them but
the first one is to school extension of
course how do you explain drawings and
engineering to people who were neither
able to read nor write I start to build
the prototype like that the innovation
was to build a clay vault so and then a
jump on the top like that with my team
and it works the community is looking it
still work so we can be
and we kept building and that is a
result the kids are happy and they love
it
the community is very proud we made it
an even animals like this donkeys loves
our buildings the next project is the
librarian gun as you know we try to use
introduced different ideas in our
buildings but we often don't have so
much material something we have in
gondol our clay pots we wanted to use
them to create openings so we just bring
them that you can see to the building
site we start cut them and then we place
them on the top of the roof before we
pour the concrete and you have this
result the openings are letting the hot
air out and light in very simple my most
recent project in candle is an high
school project I would like to share
with you DS the innovation in this
project is to cuss matte black you will
cast concrete how do you cuss mud we
start making a lot of models like you
can see and air and everything is ready
when you know what is the best recipe
and the best form you start working with
the community and sometime I can live
they will do it themselves I came to
speak to you like that another factor in
Gondo Israel when the rains can we hurry
up to protect our fragile walls against
the rain don't conform with crystal junk
load it is simply how we protect our
words the rain in burkina come very fast
and after that you have not everywhere
in the country but for us the rain is
good
it's bring sand and gravel to the river
we need to use the build we just wait
the rain to go we take the Sun we mix
them with clay and we keep building that
is it the ganda project was always
connected to training the people because
I just wanted one day when I fall down
and die that at least one person from
Gondor
keep doing this work but you will be
surprised and still alive and my people
now can use their skills to earn money
themselves usually for a young man from
yondu to earn money you have to leave
the country to the city sometimes leave
the country and some never come back
making the community with them but now
they can stay in the country and work on
different building site and earn money
to feed their family is a new quality in
this work yes you know it I have worn a
lot of award through this work for sure
it has open opportunities I have become
myself now but the reason why I do what
I do is my community when I was a kid I
was going to school I was coming back
every holiday together by the end of
every holidays I have to say goodbye to
the community going from one compound to
another one all women in Gondor will
open their clothes like that and give me
the last penny in my culture this is a
symbol of deep affection as a seven
years old guy I was impressed I just
asked my mother one day why all these
women love me so much
she just answer they are contributing to
pay for your education hoping that you
will be successful and one day come back
and help improve the quality of life of
the community I hope now that I was able
to make my community proud through this
work and I hope I was able to prove you
the power of community and to show you
that architecture can be inspiring for
communities to shape their own future
merci beaucoup
[Applause]